news May 2022 (#337)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2022-05-20-ropensci-news-digest-may-2022/index.md

---
title: rOpenSci News Digest, May 2022
author:
  - The rOpenSci Team
date: '2022-05-20'
slug: ropensci-news-digest-may-2022
categories: []
tags:
  - newsletter
description: R-universe new features! Co-working sessions. New packages and package news.
output: hugodown::md_document
params:
  last_newsletter: '2022-04-22'
rmd_hash: b31e916b6b19264c

---

<!-- Before sending DELETE THE INDEX_CACHE and re-knit! -->

Dear rOpenSci friends, it's time for our monthly news roundup! <!-- blabla --> You can read this post [on our blog](/blog/2022/05/20/ropensci-news-digest-may-2022). Now let's dive into the activity at and around rOpenSci!

## rOpenSci HQ

### R-universe prominently displays more information on packages!

Packages on [r-universe.dev](https://r-universe.dev) are now described with even more metadata to help users compare and assess them: count of GitHub stars, (transitive) dependencies, dependent packages and an overall score of the package (similar to pagerank).

{{< figure src="search.jpeg" alt="Package card on R-universe, including a count of github stars, (transitive) dependencies / dependent packages and an overall score of the package (similar to pagerank)" >}}

> You will see these numbers both in the search results and in package individual pages.

Reviewer: This text seems to imply that I should see those metrics in the screenshot, but I don't... Is the screenshot out of date, or should the text be rephrased a bit? Or, if I've missed the metrics, perhaps a brief description (or edits or arrows or something) to guide the reader.

Author: @jeroen could you help with this? (as you meant to replace the screenshots anyway)

Reviewer 2: Thanks, I've updated the screenshots now

{{< figure src="vroom1.jpeg" alt="Top of a package individual pages featuring the same badges." >}}

> Try it out as we'll be finetuning the search ranking in particular!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try it out as we've been fine-tuning the search ranking as well!
```

These metrics are not the only improvement to package individual pages: You might have also noticed (and used!)

> -   installation instructions,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   installation instructions, and,
```

{{< figure src="vroom2.jpeg" alt="Installation instructions on a package individual page, ready to be copy-pasted." >}}

-   direct links to reverse dependencies.

{{< figure src="vroom3.jpeg" alt="List of 'users' of a package, that is a list of links to reverse dependencies." >}}

> Happy space flying! :rocket: Report any bug or feature request to [our central station](https://github.com/r-universe-org/help).

Reviewer: ? (the geek in me must point out that you don't fly in space 😆 )
```suggestion
Happy space travels! :rocket: Report any bug or feature request to [our central station](https://github.com/r-universe-org/help).
```

Author: Oops!!

### Next coworking sessions

Join us for social coworking & office hours monthly on 1st Tuesdays! Hosted by Steffi LaZerte and various community hosts. Everyone welcome. No RSVP needed. Consult our [Events](/events) page to find your local time and how to join.

-   [Tuesday, 07 June 2022 9 AM Australian Western / 1:00 UTC](/events/coworking-2022-06/) "Tackle something you've always wanted to learn" *Hosted by community host Nick Tierney and [Steffi LaZerte](/author/steffi-lazerte/)*
    -   Cowork on a project of your choice;
    -   Take this time to tackle something you've always wanted to learn;
    -   Or talk to [Nick Tierney](https://ropensci.org/author/nicholas-tierney/) and discuss what it is you want to learn, and get some tips and resources to get yourself started!

> 

Reviewer: After the June coworking, I'm debating putting a hold on them until September, but want to check in with the others first. Ideally if that's settled, we can add a brief note to that effect here, but I'll have to see what's up first.

Author: Ok, I'll leave as is for now.

## Software :package:

### New packages

<div class="highlight">

</div>

The following four packages recently became a part of our software suite:

<div class='highlight'>

-   [gitcellar](https://docs.ropensci.org/gitcellar), developed by Maëlle Salmon together with Jeroen Ooms: Provide functionality to download archives (backups) for all repositories in a GitHub organization.

-   [EDIutils](https://docs.ropensci.org/EDIutils), developed by Colin Smith: A client for the Environmental Data Initiative repository REST API. The EDI data repository <https://portal.edirepository.org/nis/home.jsp> is for publication and reuse of ecological data with emphasis on metadata accuracy and completeness. It is built upon the PASTA+ software stack <https://pastaplus-core.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html#> and was developed in collaboration with the US LTER Network <https://lternet.edu/>. EDIutils includes functions to search and access existing data, evaluate and upload new data, and assist other data management tasks common to repository users. It has been [reviewed](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/498) by Jasmine Lai, and Rodrigo Pires.

> -   [ReLTER](https://docs.ropensci.org/ReLTER), developed by Alessandro Oggioni together with Micha Silver, Paolo Tagliolato, and Luigi Ranghetti: ReLTER provides access to DEIMS-SDR (<https://deims.org/>), and allows interaction with data and software implemented by eLTER Research Infrastructure (RI) thus improving data sharing among European LTER projects. ReLTER uses the R language to access and interact with the DEIMS-SDR archive of information shared by the Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) network. This package grew within eLTER H2020 as a major project that will help advance the development of European Long-Term Ecosystem Research Infrastructures (eLTER RI - <https://elter-ri.eu>). The ReLTER package functions in particular allow to: - retrieve the information about entities (e.g. sites, datasets, and activities) shared by DEIMS-SDR (see e.g. get_site_info function); - interact with the [ODSEurope](maps.opendatascience.eu) starting with the dataset shared by [DEIMS-SDR](https://deims.org/) (see e.g. [get_site_ODS](https://docs.ropensci.org/ReLTER/reference/get_site_ODS.html) function); - use the eLTER site informations to download and crop geospatial data from other platforms (see e.g. get_site_ODS function); - improve the quality of the dataset (see e.g. get_id_worms). Functions currently implemented are derived from discussions of the needs among the eLTER users community. The ReLTER package will continue to follow the progress of eLTER-RI and evolve, adding new tools and improvements as required.

Reviewer: The bullet points in here didn't get formatted correctly. Is that something you want to deal with, or this an automatically created text block?

Author: It's automatic indeed but I'll leave this comment unresolved so I fix it right before merging, after knitting one last time. Thank you!

-   [restez](https://docs.ropensci.org/restez/), Locally query GenBank. [Issue for volunteering](https://github.com/ropensci/restez/issues/23).

-   [outsider](https://docs.ropensci.org/outsider/), Install and run programs, outside of R, inside of R. [Issue for volunteering](https://github.com/ropensci/outsider/issues/16).

-   [hddtools](https://docs.ropensci.org/hddtools/), Hydrological Data Discovery Tools. [Issue for volunteering](https://github.com/ropensci/hddtools/issues/31).

If you're interested, please comment in the issues or email `info@ropensci.org`.

For more info, see

-   [our guidance on *Changing package maintainers*](https://devguide.ropensci.org/changing-maintainers.html);
-   [our *Package Curation Policy*](https://devguide.ropensci.org/curationpolicy.html).

## Package development corner

Some useful tips for R package developers. :eyes:

### Documentation: HTML \> PDF

This paragraph is not about LaTeX, but about screen-reader users! Please take time to read this [email by Jonathan Godfrey on R-pkg-devel](https://stat.ethz.ch/pipermail/r-package-devel/2022q2/007953.html).

> > Please consider the HTML alternative to any pdf, in any context, but especially in anything relating to R.

Reviewer: Wow, very powerful and beautifully written email. So much respect for Jonathan Godfrey!

Author: :100:

Community member Lluís Revilla Sancho also highlighted that [search.r-project.org](https://search.r-project.org/) provides HTML documentation for all CRAN documentation.

### Twelve quick tips for software design

You might enjoy the article ["Twelve quick tips for software design"](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009809) by Greg Wilson. It is not R specific but is relevant to package development. "Design with everyone in mind" can for instance remind of the previous point about HTML documentation.

### Renaming the default branch

> If you've been considering renaming the default branch from master (oppressive language) to main, do not miss the Tidyverse blog post Jenny Bryan wrote in October 2021 ["Renaming the default branch"](https://www.tidyverse.org/blog/2021/10/renaming-default-branch/), especially as it features useful usethis functions!

Reviewer: Awesome, definitely been on my list of things to do :grin:

Author: :tada:
